We're aboard a ship on a mission deep
into the heart of the South China Sea.
It's a days long journey
through some of the most contested
waters in the world. You can see how
close the Chinese Coast Guard is
getting to our vessel. It looks like
it's really about to hit us and it will
end
in one of the most significant
confrontations between China and the
Philippines in recent years.
For the first time, foreign journalists
have been invited to join a resupply
mission traveling over 100 nautical
miles to a remote military outpost.
That's at the center of a fierce
dispute between China and the
Philippines. We're on board the BRP
Cobra, one of two Coast Guard ships
traveling from Palawan Island to meet
two small supply boats. The Coast
Guard's plan is to escort the supply
vessels from Sabina Shoal to Second
Thomas Shoal. The journey is taking us
through China's nine dash line marking
Beijing's expansive claims to the sea.
Our destination is a reef. Both China
and the Philippines claim as their own.
Manila deliberately grounded the Sierra
Madre. A World War Two airship here in
1999 to stake its claim to the area. A
permanent contingent of Filipino
Marines is stationed on the rusting
dilapidated wreckage missions to
resupply the Sierra Madre have grown
increasingly dangerous as China
attempts to prevent the resupply boats
from reaching their destination.
Just hours into our voyage. It's clear
our convoy has been spotted. There's a
helicopter flying overhead, it went
past us a few minutes ago towards the
other Philippine coast guard boat then
turned around. This is a Chinese Navy
helicopter. It's the first sign we've
seen so far that the Chinese are aware
that we're here
under the cover of darkness. We arrive
at Sabina Shoal, the rendezvous point.
We've just met up with the supply boats.
There's one just behind me and another
one over there and now we're making our
way towards Second Thomas Shoal. In the
dead of night, the Chinese Coast Guard
starts to shadow our fleet by dawn.
We're surrounded. The Chinese vessels
are on, they're getting really close to
us. This is Chinese Coast Guard vessel
3305.
The Chinese fleet begins to encircle
our ship preventing us from getting
close to the supply boat. Our boat is
sort of turning away now because you
can see how close the Chinese Coast
Guard is getting to our
a short distance away. The crew aboard
the other Philippine Coast Guard
vessels scramble as a Chinese ship
collides into its bow.
The Chinese fleet takes positions
around our convoy veering close to
block the entrance to the reef fleets
of fishing vessels controlled by the
Chinese coast Guard move into place.
This is China's Maritime Militia in
action. We're now completely surrounded
by Chinese vessels. Some of them are
Chinese Coast Guard and some of them
are Chinese flag fishing vessels that
appear to be part of its maritime
Militia.
One of the Filipino supply boats has
become separated from its protection as
it tries to break through the Chinese
fleet.
The small boat is surrounded and
blasted with water cannons from two
Chinese coast guard ships. The cannons
smash into the bridge,
shattering windows and injuring those
inside, forcing the boat to turn back.
Finally, the remaining supply boat
manages to break through the Chinese
line, sailing through the blocking
ships to deliver its crucial supplies
to the marines aboard Sierra Madre.
Hours after the standoff began,
China's coast guard would later say
that its actions were to curtail what
it called. The Philippine vessel's
intrusion into the waters around the
reef and that it allowed the supply
vessel to pass
as our convoy makes its way back to the
island of Palawan. We are constantly
shadowed by a Chinese vessel as
encounters in the sea grow more
aggressive. So too do the risks of
these confrontations spilling over into
something much more dangerous.